# ROS 2 utilities for RTI Connext DDS

This repository contains a collection of helper resources to simplify the
implementation of ROS 2 applications which use the APIs provided by
[RTI Connext DDS Connectivity Framework](https://www.rti.com/products).

- [Use `connext_node_helpers` in a ROS 2 package](#use-connext_node_helpers-in-a-ros-2-package)
- [Connext Node API](#connext-node-api)
- [Additional C++ Helpers](#additional-c-helpers)
- [CMake Helpers](#cmake-helpers)
  - [connext_generate_typesupport_library](#connext_generate_typesupport_library)
  - [connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp](#connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp)
  - [connext_components_register_node](#connext_components_register_node)
  - [connext_add_executable](#connext_add_executable)
  - [ping-pong tester](#ping-pong-tester)
- [Other useful resources](#other-useful-resources)

## Use `connext_node_helpers` in a ROS 2 package

Package `connext_node_helpers` provides CMake and C++ helpers to facilitate the
implementation of ROS 2 packages based on the Connext DDS framework.

Add this package to your `package.xml`'s dependencies and then load it in your
`CMakeLists.txt`:

- `package.xml`:

  ```xml
  <package format="3">
    <name>my_package</name>
    
    <!-- ... -->

    <depend>connext_node_helpers</depend>
  
    <!-- ... -->
  </package>
  ```

- `CMakeLists.txt`

  - Load `connext_node_helpers` as a dependency:

    ```cmake
    find_package(connext_node_helpers REQUIRED)
    ```

  - Have build targets link `connext_node_helpers`' library:

    ```cmake
    ament_target_dependencies(my_build_target
      connext_node_helpers)
    ```
  
  - Export `connext_node_helpers` as a dependency (if building a library):

    ```cmake
    ament_export_dependencies(connext_node_helpers)
    ```

## Connext Node API

Package `connext_node_helpers` contains a helper API which ROS 2 applications
may use to simplify the creation of "native" Connext DDS endpoints.

The API simplifies the integration of these endpoints in a ROS 2 system by
automatically applying some of the ROS 2 naming conventions.

## Additional C++ Helpers

### ping-pong tester

The header files under `include/rti/ros2/ping` provide a generic implementation
of a DDS-based ping-pong tester.

Classes `rti::ros2::ping::PingPongPublisher` and `rti::ros2::ping::PingPongSubscriber`
can be used to instantiate a test for any DDS type.

For an example, see [ping_string.cpp](connext_node_helpers/src/examples/ping_string.cpp).

## CMake Helpers

Once loaded in a `CMakeList.txt`, `connext_node_helpers` offers several CMake
functions that can be used to facilitate some common build task for
ROS 2/Connext applications.

### connext_generate_typesupport_library

*Generate type support code for multiple data types and build it into a single shared library.*

Function `connext_generate_typesupport_library` simplifies the process of
defining custom data types for a ROS 2/Connext application using standard
[OMG IDL](https://www.omg.org/spec/IDL) syntax.

`connext_generate_typesupport_library` takes a list of IDL files, and it
will generate type support code to use the data types they define with 
Connext DDS' [Modern C++ API](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-dds/6.1.0/doc/api/connext_dds/api_cpp2/index.html)
using [`rtiddsgen`](https://community.rti.com/static/documentation/connext-dds/6.1.0/doc/manuals/connext_dds_professional/code_generator/users_manual/index.htm).

The input IDL files can be specified in multiple ways:

- As ROS message identifiers of the form `<message-namespace>/<message-name>`, e.g. `std_msgs/String`. Use argument `MESSAGES`
  to specify IDL files with this syntax.

- As ROS service identifiers of the form `<service-namespace>/<service-name>`, e.g. `std_srvs/Trigger`. Use argument `SERVICES`
  to specify IDL files with this syntax.

- As IDL file paths with an optional, slash-separated, namespace, using syntax
  `<idl-file-path>[@<idl-namespace>]`. Use argument `IDLS` to specify IDL files
  with this syntax.

When IDL files are specified as ROS messages and/or services, the function will
automatically try to load the containing package using `find_package(REQUIRED)`.

Once the package has been loaded, the function will try to load the IDL files
that are automatically generated by ROS 2 for every custom interface. These
files must be installed under `<package-install-prefix>/share/<package>/msg` and
`<package-install-prefix>/share/<package>/srv`.

**WARNING** Not all of the IDL files that are automatically generated by ROS 2
can be correctly parsed by `rtiddsgen`. If you plan on using the "standard" ROS
types with native Connext DDS endpoints, consider using package [`connext_msgs`](https://github.com/asorbini/rticonnextdds-ros2-msgs)
which contains slightly modified (yet still interoperable) versions of these
types that can be successfully fed to `rtiddsgen`.

The function offers a few more options. Some of these are similar to the ones
accepted by [`connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp`](#connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp)
which this function uses to actually define a code generation target for each
input IDL.

- `DEPENDS` (List)
  - List of targets which will be added as a dependency to each code generation target.
- `EXPORT_TYPES_LIST` (String)
  - Name of a variable which will be set with the list of IDL files included
    in the library.
- `INCLUDES` (List)
  - List of directories which will be added to the include path of the generated library.
- `INSTALL_PREFIX` (String)
  - Installation prefix where the generated header files will be installed.
    Default: `include/`.
- `NO_DEFAULT_INCLUDES` (Boolean)
  - By default, the function will automatically add the directory of each input
    IDL to `rtiddsgen`'s include path, to enable `#include` directives that may
    be contained in the files. When a large number of files is provided, this
    may cause the resulting command line to be too large to be parsed by
    `rtiddsgen`, particularly if running in server mode.
  - If this variable is true, no additional directory will be automatically
    added to the include path.
- `SERVER` (Boolean)
  - Run `rtiddsgen` in server mode. This can be speed up code generation considerably,
    and it should always be used when processing a large number of input files.
- `WORKING_DIRECTORY` (String)
  - Directory from where to invoke `rtiddsgen`. Defaults to `${CMAKE_CURRENT_SOURCE_DIR}`.
- `ZEROCOPY` (Boolean)
  - Link the generated library with the Connext DDS libraries required to support
    Zero Copy Transfer Over Shared Memory.


*Example usage:*

```cmake
find_package(connext_node_helpers REQUIRED)

connext_generate_typesupport_library(my_connext_types_lib
  MESSAGES
    std_msgs/String
    std_msgs/Header
    builtin_interfaces/Time
    sensor_msgs/PointField
    sensor_msgs/PointCloud2
  IDLS
    idl/my/custom/ns/MyType.idl@my/custom/ns
    idl/SomeTypesWithoutNamespace.idl
  ZEROCOPY
)
```

### connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp

*Generates type support code with `rtiddsgen` from an input IDL file.*

`connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp` is similar to
`connext_generate_typesupport_library`, but it provides lower-level functionality,
only to defines a code generation target, and not to actually build the
generated files.

The function returns a list of generated files  in an output variable named `<type_pkg>_<type>_FILES`.

It is up to the caller to consume this list appropriately, typically by
pasing it `add_executable()` or `add_library()`.

The compilation target will also need to be configured with the appropriate
include directories. By default, all files will be generated in
`${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/rtiddsgen/<pkg>`, and it is sufficient to add
`${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/rtiddsgen` to the include path (since all files
should always be included as `#include "<pkg>/<type>.idl"`).

*Example usage:*

```cmake
find_package(connext_node_helpers REQUIRED)

# Generate type support for type `std_msgs::msg::String`.
# When using this syntax, the first argument is the "base name" of the type
# and the PACKAGE argument must always be specified to qualify the type.
# The list of generated files will be stored as `${std_msgs_String_FILES}`.
# The generated code must be included with `#include "std_msgs/msg/String.hpp"`.
find_package(std_msgs REQUIRED)
connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp(String PACKAGE std_msgs)

# Generate type support from a typical IDL file for Connext.
# In this case, the input is the path to the input file, and the
# PACKAGE argument can be used to specify an optional "include prefix".

# Generated files will be available as `${my_custom_ns_MyType_FILES}`
# The generated code must be included with `#include "my/custom/ns/MyType.hpp"`.
connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp(idl/my/custom/ns/MyType.idl
  PACKAGE my/custom/ns
)

# Generated files will be available as `${SomeTypesWithoutNamespace_FILES}`
# The generated code must be included with `#include "SomeTypesWithoutNamespace.hpp"`.
connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp(idl/SomeTypesWithoutNamespace.idl)

add_executable(my_app
  main.c
  ${std_msgs_String_FILES}
  ${my_custom_ns_MyType_FILES}
  ${SomeTypesWithoutNamespace_FILES}
)

target_include_directories(my_app
  PRIVATE ${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/rtiddsgen
)
```

### connext_components_register_node

*Generate an executable to "spin up" a ROS 2/Connext node.*

Function `connext_components_register_node` is similar to
`rclcpp_components_register_node`. The function takes a node from a component
library, and generates an executable to spin it in a `main()` function.

This function differs from `rclcpp_components_register_node` in that the
generate executable will link Connext DDS directly, and it will also be
properly linked in order to allow sharing of the DomainParticipantFactory
between the node component and the RMW layer.

*Example usage:*

```cmake
find_package(connext_node_helpers REQUIRED)

# First create a library with node components
add_library(my_node_components SHARED
  my_node.cpp)
ament_target_dependencies(my_node_components
  rclcpp
  rclcpp_components)
target_link_libraries(my_node_components
  RTIConnextDDS::cpp2_api)

# Then register each component into its own executable
connext_components_register_node(my_node_components
  PLUGIN "my_node::MyNode"
  EXECUTABLE my_node)
```

### connext_add_executable

*Build a ROS 2/DDS C++ application.*

This function can be used to simplify the definition of a build target for a
ROS 2 C++ application that requires direct access to RTI Connext DDS. The
function will take care of most "boiler plate" commands required to configure the
target with the required Connext DDS dependencies and the appropriate linkage
to share DDS entities with the RMW layer.

*Example usage:*

```cmake
find_package(connext_node_helpers REQUIRED)
find_package(std_msgs REQUIRED)

# Generate type support files
connext_generate_message_typesupport_cpp(String
  PACKAGE std_msgs)

# Build application and generated files
connext_add_executable(
  NAME my_app
  SOURCES
    my_app.cpp
    ${std_msgs_String_FILES}
  INCLUDES
    ${CMAKE_CURRENT_BINARY_DIR}/rtiddsgen)
```

## Other useful resources

- [`rticonnextdds-ros2-demos`](https://github.com/asorbini/rticonnextdds-ros2-demos)
  - Collection of example hybrid ROS 2/Connext applications.
- [`rticonnextdds-ros2-msgs`](https://github.com/asorbini/rticonnextdds-ros2-msgs)
  - Helper library containing C++11 message type supports generated with
   `rtiddsgen` for almost every type include in ROS 2.
